docs(release-notes): add 8.7.0 release notes (#5259)
canonical/snapcraft: docs/release-notes/snapcraft-8-7.rst

.. _release-8.7:

Snapcraft 8.7 release notes
=============================

03 March 2025

Learn about the new features, changes, and fixes introduced in Snapcraft 8.7.

Requirements and compatibility
------------------------------

See :ref:`System requirements<system-requirements>` for information on the minimum
hardware and installed software.

What's new
----------

Snapcraft 8.7 brings the following features, integrations, and improvements.

Bash completion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Previously, the completion file for the Snapcraft snap was outdated or incorrect

Reviewer: Do we need to specify "snap"? "Snapcraft snap" tastes a bit unsavoury.

Author: Nope, dropped

because it had to be manually updated.

We've updated the completion file to be generated dynamically, which means it will

> always provide up-to-date command-line completion of commands and options in

Reviewer: Consider:

```suggestion
always autocomplete the latest commands and options in
```

Bash-compatible shells. Try it out in by typing ``snapcraft`` and pressing
:kbd:`Tab` in your terminal.

Improved remote builder
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Remote builds can now use the ``--build-for`` option to filter entries in an
``architectures`` or ``platforms`` key in a project file.

Support for confdbs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snapcraft now supports listing and editing ``confdbs`` with the commands

> ``list-confdbs`` and ``edit-confdbs``. These commands replace the previous commands,
> ``list-registries`` and ``edit-registries`` respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``list-confdbs`` and ``edit-confdbs``. These new commands replace the previous
``list-registries`` and ``edit-registries`` commands, respectively.
```

Support for relocatable pkgconfig files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Snapcraft now checks if `pkg-config`_ (``.pc``) files are relocatable. If the file is

> relocatable, Snapcraft will not modify its ``prefix`` field.

Reviewer: Consider:

```suggestion
relocatable, Snapcraft will no longer modify its ``prefix`` field.
```

> Doc improvements
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: For the pedants:

```suggestion
Documentation improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

The following how-to guides have been integrated:

* :ref:`Use an extension <use-an-extension>`
* :ref:`List extensions <list-extensions>`
* :ref:`Enable experimental extensions <enable-experimental-extensions>`
* :ref:`Use the env-injector extension <use-the-env-injector-extension>`
* :ref:`Use the GNOME extension <use-the-gnome-extension>`

> The following reference docs have been integrated:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following references have been integrated:
```

* :ref:`env-injector extension <env-injector-extension>`
* :ref:`GNOME extension <gnome-extension>`
* :ref:`KDE neon extensions <kde-neon-extensions>`
* :ref:`Flutter extension <flutter-extension>`
* :ref:`ROS 1 extension <ros-1-extension>`
* :ref:`ROS 1 content extensions <ros-1-content-extensions>`
* :ref:`ROS 2 extensions <ros-2-foxy-extension>`
* :ref:`ROS 2 content extensions <ros-2-content-extensions>`

Backwards-incompatible changes
------------------------------

> Remove platform option for remote builds
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Removed platform option for remote builds
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

> The ``--platform`` option has been removed for the ``remote-build`` command.

Reviewer: Should this be:

```suggestion
The ``--platform`` option has been removed from the ``remote-build`` command.
```

This option was dropped because it doesn't provide predictable results for remote

> builds, due to Launchpad's handling of the ``platforms`` field in project files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
builds, due to Launchpad's handling of the ``platforms`` key in project files.
```

- `#5258`_ The Flutter plugin fails to install Flutter for ``core22`` and ``core24``
  snaps.

Fixed bugs and issues
---------------------

The following issues have been resolved in Snapcraft 8.7:

- `#5250`_ Resources path for ``QtWebEngineProcess`` wasn't exported for snaps
  using the KDE Neon 6 extension.
- `craft-parts#978`_ The ``source-subdir`` field was ignored for the
  :ref:`Go Use plugin<craft_parts_go_use_plugin>`.
- `craft-application#600`_ The same build environment may be re-used for platforms with
  the same ``build-on`` and ``build-for`` architectures.
- `craft-application#618`_ The remote builder would clean up projects after
  they timed out.
- `craft-application#619`_ The remote builder suggested using a nonextistent
  ``--build-id`` option if the build timed out.
- `craft-application#620`_ The remote builder help suggested using a nonextistent
  ``--status`` option.

Contributors
------------

We would like to express a big thank you to all the people who contributed to
this release.

:literalref:`@sergio-costas<https://github.com/sergio-costas>`,
:literalref:`@medubelko<https://github.com/medubelko>`,
:literalref:`@bepri<https://github.com/bepri>`,

> and :literalref:`@mr-cal<https://github.com/mr-cal>`

Reviewer: Alphabetical order is less biased. :)

Author: Good point!
